what is an interface how to use it and
what are they good for those are the
questions I get a lot they also happen
to be my questions when I first learned
about interfaces at first I really
didn't understand why we needed
interfaces now after working with them
for years I understand just how
indispensable they are in this video I'm
gonna answer all those questions about
interfaces by showing off how they can
be used in actual code in case you don't
know who I am my name is Tim quarry and
I learn be a software developer the hard
way through trial and error that way
leaves gaps
I built this channel because learning
c-sharp should be easier if you want to
learn c-sharp the easy way there are two
things I recommend first subscribe to
this channel don't forget to hit that
little bell so you get alerts when I
publish new videos every Monday 2nd in
the description below you'll see a link
to join my mailing list follow that link
and sign up you'll get emails about
upcoming courses special discounts and
insider access to all the training
resources
I provide ok let's start in on learning
about interfaces we're going to start by
looking at a project that I have built
now note that the link in the
description to go to the blog post for
this video also will have on it the
source code at the start of this project
and at the end so you can go to that
blog post and download the start to kind
of follow along if you want now what I
have here is a console application that
acts as a point of sale system now
please note that I've really simplified
the application in order to keep the
focus on interfaces instead of the
application actually performing tasks so
instead of emailing somebody it's just
going to say I simulated sending email
ok so let's look at what it does we have
here a shopping cart and that is just a
list of physical products that's the
person has put in their cart now again
we're starting the middle of process
we're not adding to the cart we're not
removing from the cart we're just saying
that's what it already is and we're
going from here
and so to populate this I have this add
sample data method which just puts three
items in the cart on their football and
I am Tim quarry t-shirt and a hard drive
so those are my three things that I've
put my shopping cart that I want by now
the next thing we have is a customer and
so as a customer model we'll look at
that in a minute just like the physical
product model look at a minute but to
populate this customer object I have the
get customer method which just creates a
new customer model with Tim Cory is the
the person's name and city email address
and phone number filled in so that's it
we have our shopping cart we have our
customer and then what we do is we loop
through using a for each we loop through
every item in the cart and say prod
which is the product each individual
product prod ship item any pass in the
customer object so let's go look at the
physical product model to see that prod
item so here we go in our class library
called demo library we have a physical
product model which each physical
product has a title it has a boolean
that says has order been completed and
then it has a method called ship item
which takes in a customer model so what
happens is if the order has not been
completed so equals false if it's not
been completed then we sent we have that
console.writeline that says simulating
shipping this item to this person in
this city and then we mark the order
complete that's it so the customer model
is even simpler it's just let's see like
six properties first name last name
street address city email address and
phone number so that's really that's all
the application does it just loops to
the cart and it ships the items if we
run this
I'm pull over here it says simulating
shipping the nerf football to Tim it's
in Scranton
simulating shipping the I am Tim Cory
t-shirt to Tim in Scranton and
simulating shipping the hard drive to
Tim in Scranton okay
really simple application but because
this gives us a foundation for looking
at how interfaces can help us so here's
the question right now we have a list of
physical product model and that physical
product is something that actually has
to be shipped to the user but what if we
had another product in fact let's add a
new class where I called this the
digital product model make it public and
we're gonna have a same type of thing we
have a title let's just art the title
for now okay so it's got a title but
here's a deal we don't mail a digital
product say it's a download of some kind
we wouldn't send that in the mail so
what would we do well we'd probably
actually email that to the user so we
have something like ship item let's
actually grab his whole signature here
I'll copy it we'd probably have a ship
item method but instead of doing this
and doing a console.writeline saying hey
we've we're simulating mailing it let's
actually grab this and we'll say you
know what we're going to do rest you
know the same thing but instead of
saying that whereas a to customer dodge
email address and then not of course in
the city
so we're just gonna say hey we're
shipping this item we're gonna let's
instead of saying shipping let's say
emailing we're emailing this item to
this email address but here's the
problem how do I put the digital product
model into this cart and the answer is I
can't
now one way I solve this problem would
be to create an abstract base class that
has title maybe has already been
completed and a ship item method and
then we can inherit from that and then
have the base class be what we had a
list of and that might work except for
if we have things that aren't even or
are even less equal for example well if
we had a service product model where
you're buying a service
maybe consulting hours well there is no
shipping for that and so that's
definitely not the same thing the
physical product and if you try and hair
from the same base class ear isn't work
so I don't think that inheritance is the
right way to go here but instead we can
do is create an interface so an
interface let's talk about that is and
then we'll actually see in action an
interface is a contract that's all it is
and so the contract says is here's the
things that whatever class that
implements the contract here's the
things that it will have okay
so let's create an interface by hand
first and I'll show you a shortcut for
creating it from a class so right click
on the demo library and say add new item
interface now a naming convention pride
the naming convention for interfaces is
to start them with a capital I and then
have all your your words after words
starting with a capital letter so for
example where I call this the I product
model so both P and M are capitalized
all right so this is Pascal case with a
capital I the front and that is quite
important because it signifies this is
an interface and not inheritance and
I'll show you why it's important just a
minute first thing you do make our
interface public and now this again it's
a contract portion we're saying these
are the things that any class that
implements this will have so let's look
at a physical product model we have a
title has order been complete and ship
item I'm actually going to copy all
three of these just the the top not the
actual code and then paste them in here
it's a lot faster do it that way another
way of doing it would be to if we did
something like this like for property
it's a prop and then type it out notice
it yells at me that's okay the reason
why it's Yaya me is because with an
interface you can't have public because
everything in the interface is public
and the reason why is this is a contract
and so therefore you have to have only
public things in a contract otherwise
there's no plan putting it in the
contract if no one can see it so you
have to delete out the public first and
that's why I do the prop and create it
and then come back and delete the public
okay now instead I use copy and paste it
from my class and so therefore I can
just delete the public off of all of
these but notice a couple things first
of all this ship item method has to have
a
: at the end and second the private set
doesn't work therefore we have to be a
just a getter so there's our our
interface called
I product model and that's not too hard
again it's just the contract and so
that's why we don't have any code in
here there's no code in here it's just
here's the things that we will have and
these are what's called the signature
lines so this is a method signature this
is a properties signature and so a
signature is is just the important bits
so what it returns its name and what
takes in and actually the name of the
property doesn't matter that much now
typically I name the same thing or name
them correctly so that it matches up but
that's not a big deal because it's
really only the type that really matters
so for properties it's the get in a set
versus just to get okay and again the
return type and the name those the
important bits so this contract right
now says whoever implements me will have
a title property with getting a set
that's a type string it will have it has
order been completed property with just
a get and a boolean return value and it
will have a method called ship item that
takes in a customer model and returns
nothing so that's the contract for I
product model so let's go apply this to
our physical product model class after
physical product model we say : I
product model and that's it and the
reason why is is it
is because we already have the title
property has been ordered been completed
property and ship item method and
there's signatures all match if we go a
digital product model knows you don't
have he has order been completed so if I
were to implement that interface I
product model it still yells at me and
says hey you're missing something now
there's two ways of solving this one you
could go over to the I project model and
look at what you don't have in this case
it's this one right here and then you
can come back over here and either paste
it in and put public in front or you can
type the whole thing out all over again
but it's an easier way if you hit
control dot when you have the prod
selected or just have a cursor on it you
can implement the interface and notice
it says in this window over here on the
right it has highlighted in green it's
gonna add one thing the public pool has
order been completed so it ignore the
fact that we have title and ship item
because those are part of the contract
and so it says I don't need to add those
again but you are missing me has order
been completed now the one thing is
whenever you add something like that
during the control dot and say implement
interface for every property and every
method it's going to add this throw new
not implemented exception if it adds it
and this is a safety feature Microsoft
has built in what a saying is we don't
want you to accidentally put sample code
or blank code into production but we
don't want to break your code in
debugging so if you're just building
this application we don't want to break
your code if you're not actually using
the has or have been completed yet but
if you try and use this before you've
addressed this throw new not implement
exception
if you try and access this it's gonna
throw a new exception of type not
implemented yet
so what you do is just delete those out
and don't forget I want to add a private
set if I needed it but I will so so
there you go so now I have added
something extra and you may think well
you has change a signature and yeah kind
of I did but the public version of it
was just the get and that's still the
case
it still read-only from the public side
this is just private internal so that's
the other thing that interfaces with an
interface that doesn't lock you into
only having what's in the contract for
example I'm going to actually add
another property here and this is going
to be the property for total downloads
left rest start off a value of five and
the idea here let me get private said
again the idea with this is that when it
comes to digital products maybe we're
going to limit them to a certain number
of maximum downloads a pretty common
number is five so that's why I've
defaulted the total downloads left to B
and what happens is every time we email
the item or do a ship item surround this
with so right click snip it surround
with an if statement if has order been
completed equals false so I just saying
let's make sure that the order is not
yet been completed then I'm going to do
is seem like the email and then say
total downloads left-
equals one to subtract one from a total
if total downloads left equals let's say
less than one that way if we ever had a
problem where we we skipped one or
something like that it's still gonna
correctly handle that
so if total downloads laugh is less than
1 so 0 negative 1 they have to ever then
has or been complete equals true and
let's just make sure we set that to zero
that way again if we somehow skipped 0
went to the native one rest set back to
0 so it's clean ok so now the way
digital products work is we check to
make sure that the order has not been
complete meaning we haven't finished off
all 5 downloads and as long as we
haven't we email the like the
information and then we subtract one
from atto downloads left if that goes
below one then we mark this has been as
having been completed and then if we
can't download it any more times so
that's a little different from the
physical product where once we we check
that has been completed as false
once we ship it we say it's true because
obviously if you order a t-shirt you
shouldn't get get 5 of those you can't
get one of those once you pay for all 5
so the lodging is different here and
over here and the digital product model
there's even an extra property that is
public and yet that's no problem for the
interface because the interface does not
care what properties and methods you
have in the mop in the class all's it
cares is that you at least have
everything the contract says you will
have that's all it cares about and so
this contract is for
idle has order been completed and ship
item that's it okay so with that in mind
that kind of drives how we do interfaces
so we just need to have just the things
we need to identify as a certain type
like a product model so we're saying
here that products have titles they have
an order completion status and they have
a ship item method so even if there's
more complexity beyond that doesn't
matter a product has those three things
okay so now we can come back to program
CS and instead of saying physical
product model we can say I product model
so instead of the actual class we can
give it the implementation or the I'm
sorry the interface and so that
interface allows us to put more than one
type into this list now this adds
sampled data is kind of throw a fit here
and that's because we're actually
returning a list of physical product
model which is instead going to be a
product model and we'll do the same
thing for our actual output there we go
now notice I didn't actually change
adding physical products that's still
fine it's just an a list of AI product
model instead so now we can actually
come down here to our ad sample data and
add a digital product output dye add new
digital whoops
Digital product model and the title is I
don't know lesson source code alright so
there's a lesson source code that's all
I have to do and now we've added digital
product to our cart as well as three
physical products with nothing else
changed and let's actually change where
I changed the this right here to an eye
product model with just that change
going over to interface instead of the
actual physical product model class if
we run this notice where we simulate
shipping those three items but now we're
simulating emailing lesson source code
to Tina Anton Corey so that's the first
reason why interfaces are so powerful is
that we can depend on those contracts
and then work with them accordingly even
if the actual implementation is a bit
different for each so let's look at how
that works for our list
we're saying I product model which is an
interface it's just a contract so we're
saying is we don't know what's going to
this cart all we know is everything that
goes in this cart will follow after this
contract it will have all the things
that contract says it will have now we
loop through each item again we look at
that as a contract so we can say well I
know that and let's just come down here
and say prod dot now the equals get
hashcode get type and to string come
with
the base object type so we can ignore
those those are actually inherited but
these three things here title ship item
and has or been completed
all come from the contract so we can we
can deal with we know about those three
things even though we don't know the
type of the item what that does mean
though is that digital product model has
that total downloads left well you don't
see total downloads left in this list
and the reason why is because it's not
in the contract therefore it's not
common across all the items and known to
exist therefore we can't see it it is
there it's just not know okay and we get
into how to actually find that but for
now let's start with just the interface
so the interface is a contract
whoever implements that contract will
have whatever the contract says they
will have at least other items can use
that contract as the variable type and
then that variable will be able to
directly access anything the contract
specifies but nothing outside that okay
so that's the basics of an interface
there is no implementation there is no
source code you can put in here it's not
like you're gonna be able to write code
in one spot and then brain to multiple
multiple locations that's not how it
works but that's actually prior good
thing in a lot of cases in fact most
cases because for example with our ship
item the way we ship a physical product
is totally different than how we ship a
digital product and that's even a really
simplistic example of just doing console
right lines now an interface has no
modifiers here there's
no public private or internal data stuff
it's all public that's how a contract
works okay so you can't put bug here and
also you can't again put the curly
braces for a method but instead you put
your semicolon at the end of a method
you don't put on at the end of a
property because it's already extended :
at the end of the get one more thing a
note and that is how this fits into the
inheritance model so if we were going to
inherit from physical product model or
let's say physical product model
inherits from a base class let's just
create really quickly a sample base
class let's call it the physical product
base class probably base okay this has
nothing in it it's just to show the
inheritance verses interfaces so if
we're going to inherit from fazool
product base we cannot do this that's a
problem because the very first thing in
line after the semicolon must be what
you inherit from you cannot have it
second in line so therefore it must be
first and that'll work with interfaces
you can have them at any point after
what you inherit from so you can mix and
match you have multiple after this but
with c-sharp you can only inherit from
one parent okay so you can't have
multiple inheritances but you can have
as many interfaces as you want because
all the interfaces is a contract now
note if I don't inherit from something
an interface is first in the line and
that's okay just know that if you come
later and say well I'll actually want to
hear it from something you put it first
that also let's just point this out too
it's very quick and easy to understand
which one is a class you're inheriting
from versus which one is an interface
because interfaces all start with a
capital I okay
so that's that's kind of cleaned up
there now you know how to put interface
onto a class you know how to implement
it let's just show off just so you can
see it and I'll actually delete it
afterwards but if you have a class you
know what I'm not gonna delete it I'm
actually gonna create on the customer
model just so that we have it there
we're not gonna use it
I just want to show you how to create a
interface off of an existing class so
you have a class ago you know what I
actually want to create an interface no
problem put your cursor on the class
name control dot extract interface you
get this little dialog here this just
says which things do you want to be
included in your interface they don't
all have to be but in this case I want
them all and what do you wanna name your
interface I customer models fine done
public interface i customer model
there's all of our types and actually
come back to the customer model hit now
and hair or implements the i customer
model so that's just a quick shortcut
for creating interfaces now notice I
almost said implements and actually or
inherits from I actually mean implements
and those those two different words are
actually important you do not inherit
from an interface inheritance implies
that you're bringing code down with you
that inheritance can only be one parent
you cannot have multiple things you
inherit from but a interface is a
contract and so therefore we said that
you implement an interface and the
reason why you implement it is because
you actually write all the code so you
write the code for a title that has been
completed and the ship item method so
your is implementing that contract
you're saying I'm going to do what this
contract says I will do now let's create
one more interface off of just this
property here the total downloads left
because I want to I want to show that
off in certain places
so let's actually right-click on demo
library say add new item interface and
we'll call this the I digital digital
product let's just call ID is a product
model make it public and we'll paste in
that code that I grabbed and it gave me
to the private set off because we can't
have private items so there's our
interface I digital product model I'm
actually going to apply this to my
digital product now I can do this where
I say comma and another interface no
problem because these are two separate
contracts that I'm saying I will have
all this stuff in here in this class I
do
and this one's saying I will have all
the stuff in here in this class and I do
with all this one has is just this they
may be tempted to do that in order to
have the the items in here and in here
but here's the deal if you do it this
way if you ever access it as an ID
digital product model
you will only have access to told
downloads left that's it but what if you
wanted to add the ability to see this to
our our list here of I project model
well in that case what you can do is say
I digital product model it is a I
product model so what's happening here
is is we're actually adding all this
stuff from this contract into this
contract as well as the new stuff as
well that means that this digital
product model can be just I'd is a
product model they may think well now
it's not a product model but if I run
this it runs no problem so how is it
let's go back to our program SCS how is
it that this digital product model is
going into an eye product model list
when it doesn't directly implement eye
product model and the reason why is
because I digital product model
implements the eye product model so it
brings along the eye product model
contract as well and it says okay here's
the initial contract I'm gonna add more
stuff to it
I'm not gonna move anything I'm just
gonna add more stuff to it so let's
demonstrate how we'd use that and why
it's useful so back over here in the
program CS we loop through each product
and say ship item what if we wanted to
say for our digital products how many
downloads we have left for that item now
we could go to our digital product model
and put that console.writeline in here
but let's just say we don't have access
to that or we don't want to modify
that we want just for the user-interface
purpose well in our for each we can say
if prod is I digital product model
digital okay unless what that's its gun
with us doing it's saying if this item
right here which is an eye product model
but remember that's just the contracted
implements that doesn't mean that's the
only thing it does so if this item is
actually also implementing the I digital
product model if it is put that into the
digital property value local variable so
I've actually created a local variable
on the fly right here called digital and
so if it's an eye digital product model
where I put that value in here and now I
can use that inside these clear braces
it goes away after the closed curly
brace so I could say console.writeline
dollar sign let's start with for the
digital dot title you have digital dot
total downloads left downloads left okay
so what can I do here well I'm saying I
have access to the title but I also have
access to the total downloads left which
is not part of the eye project model
contract but because I've now asked are
you also an eye digital product model
I've put that into the digital which
means digital has access to everything I
digital product model has
which includes the total downloads left
so now I can access that extra property
the only digital products have we run
this note that only for the last one we
get this for the lesson source code you
have for downloads left so it only did
that for just the one that was actually
a digital product for anything else it
ignored it because this if was false so
it says if this product is an I digital
product model and it's not so skip it
don't assign it to a local variable this
new way of using is is actually part of
the C sharp 7.0 so if you're not on I
believe it's Visual Studio 2015 or
higher with the latest update but if
you're not on that or higher that won't
work this way you have to actually do it
in two steps so there's the is and then
check and see if it's null if it's not
null then doing it this way is much more
efficient and it's a one step process
and as your so it's a whole lot easier
to use so my recommendation to you is if
you don't have visual Sophia 2017 the
communication is free you can go watch
my ten free tools video to see how to
get Visual Studio for free I understand
if you're in a corporate environment
can't but if if you all possible get the
latest version of Visual Studio at all
times it's just you get all the cool fun
stuff so that is right there is really
handy because it allows us to kind of
cast this into a new type now I don't
have to do it to an interface
I could just say digital product model
that would still work nothing really
changes but I'm just doing it to a
different interface now I do want to
point out remember I said that for the
the digital product model if we didn't
do this
and instead we have both e I'll just put
at the end I approach model like so
here's the problem
notice yelling me for title because
digital now has only access to one
property and that's the total downloads
left that's it
doesn't have to access anything else
because that's all this contract has
access to even though the digital
product model implements both contracts
that's why if possible and if it makes
sense you have as additive method here
where you're saying take everything from
I product model and also add this one
extra thing is these five extra things
whatever the contract says doing that
you can still use the interface and yet
you have access to all the stuff you've
already expected to have so that's just
some of the power of interfaces the
other thing I had already touched on we
haven't talked about here but you can
see is the fact that my code now doesn't
have to change even though I add a new
product model so if I add a like I said
a service prot model or a you know some
other kind of maybe a hybrid product
model or a coarse product model no
problem my code doesn't have to change
at all except for I'm actually adding
those sample items to the cart
so if I added let's right-click on the
demo library and say add new class and I
called this the course product model I'm
gonna get public and I'm going to
implement the product model like control
dot and say implement the interface
and I get I'll take the not implemented
exceptions out for my getters and
setters
and so here what I'm gonna do is I'm
gonna say console.writeline oops let me
check the head and complete it first so
if has already been completed equals
false now some of you may be saying well
you can do the the bang where you put
the exclamation point in front and then
you don't need to do a check like this
and yes you can do that and this bang
indicates not so if not has orbit
completed also known as false so if this
was true not true as false
so therefore false is true it's a little
confusing ok the other thing is this
blends in together so if you're not
careful you don't realize that's an
exclamation point and not a character as
part of the variable name that's why I
try to be as explicit as possible so you
know
oh it's false this really helps new
developers because it makes it a lot
more scannable for a new developer so
quick rabbit trail that's also in my top
10 best practices but yes so I just make
sure that I explicitly say equals false
it does not change anything as far as
the actual compiled code it's the same
exact thing so you're not gonna actually
gonna have any kind of performance gains
or losses by doing this so if not it has
not yet been completed then we're going
to just say let's do a dollar side first
added the let's put the title course to
customer first name paucity s account
and then we'll close our quotes and then
we'll set the has order been completely
equals true okay it's a really simple
very very similar to our physical
product except instead of mailing
something we're actually supplying it to
their account but it's a one done action
so with that all being said without
changing any other part of my you know
quote unquote real code which this is
simulating a real code was doing the
actual work now changing anything there
I can say output dot add new course
product model the title is dotnet course
start to finish and that's it so without
changing any code I can hit start and
now we are shipping physical products we
are emailing digital products and we're
adding course products to their account
so that's another benefit of interfaces
is you're not tied specifically to a
certain type that's really big that's a
really important thing because if we
were tied to that physical product model
which we started with then we have to
change a lot of our code if we want to
have other product types and that causes
a messy situation especially if your
application is it all large and that's
why working against interfaces is almost
a a must when it comes to medium to
large application especially because if
you want make any kind of change it
takes so much work otherwise or you're
making modifications to the physical
product model or maybe it's called
physical product model but really is
physical or digital you know kind of
trashed shoehorn
in and that's we come across companies
where you walk in and say these names
don't make sense
well it did originally it's just that
the purpose behind it has changed as the
code had evolved so those kind of things
are kind of ugly so if at all possible
code against an interface not the
implementation so don't say you know
customer model say I customer model it
just leaves you open to more flexibility
down the road I recently did a series on
design patterns and I'm not done yet but
I started with the first five videos
being on a solid framework of solid
principles if you want to see the real
power of interfaces kind of the next
level watch those five videos because
those five videos go over basically
everyone that uses interfaces in order
to improve and disconnect and make your
code just so much better so that's what
interfaces are in nutshell that's going
to make sure you go up my blog post and
get both the starter source code and
also the end and kind of play around it
and see how they work my encouragement
to you is practice this stuff because
the more you practice with interfaces
and the more you try things out the more
comfortable you are with them the the
more you must understand why you need
them sometimes at first it feels like
it's just an extra layer of stuff but
trust me it's not it's an essential
layer of protection and loose coupling
for your application it really helps you
disconnect from those tightly bound
monolithic applications so that's it for
interfaces if you have any questions or
any comments please leave them down
below thanks for watching and as always
I am Tim quarry